HARI SREENIVASAN: But first:
As we heard, Senate Republicans
are pushing hard to pass
their own bill next week
to replace and overhaul
the Affordable Care Act.
One of the key issues,
major cuts to Medicaid,
the joint federal-state
program that provides
health care to
low-income Americans,
the elderly and disabled.
It was expanded under Obamacare.
But now 14 million Medicaid
recipients stand to lose that
coverage under a bill passed
by the House.
Reports out tonight say there
will be even deeper cuts
under the Senate version.
Special correspondent Cat Wise
reports from Los Angeles on
how these cuts could directly
affect patients.
CAT WISE: A homeless man on
Skid Row hoping to finally
get a roof over his head.
A middle-class mom
earning an income to
care of her disabled son.
A working-class truck
driver getting care for his
complex medical problems.
Three very different lives,
with a common thread now at
risk of being cut: Medicaid.
Los Angeles is well known
for its Hollywood stars
with glamorous lifestyles.
But the city is also home to
many who are less fortunate.
The working poor and homeless
here have benefited from
the Affordable Care Act.
In fact, about 1.2
million residents gained
health insurance through
the Medicaid expansion.
But all that may
be about to change.
The Republican plan to replace
the Affordable Care Act, passed
by the House of Representatives
in May and now being
considered by the Senate,
would fundamentally
alter Medicaid in two
key ways.
First, the ACA's Medicaid
expansion -- that offered states
the option of covering most
non-disabled childless adults
with incomes below and just
above the poverty line -- would
end within several years.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States: We're going to
get this passed through the
Senate.
I feel so confident.
CAT WISE: The House bill, which
President Trump cheered in
May, but has since reportedly
called mean, also calls for
converting the entire program
from one with no cap on dollars
spent to one where states
get a fixed amount of money.
It would give state
governments more flexibility
about how to spend
Medicaid dollars, but would
cut the amount they receive
by more than $800 billion
over a decade, according
to the Congressional
Budget Office.
SEN.
MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY), Majority
Leader: I think we will have
ample opportunity to read
and amend the bill.
CAT WISE: A Senate version,
which would eventually
need to be merged with
the House bill before
becoming law, is still being
crafted, but is said to include
many of these same adjustments,
though with a potentially
longer rollback of the
Medicaid expansion.
California stands to lose more
than any other state under
the House version, $6 billion
a year starting in 2020, and
more than $24 billion by 2027.
Those cuts could have a
big impact on this group.
WOMAN: I think you
have hypertension,
diabetes, neuropathy.
CAT WISE: For the last several
years, Los Angeles County
has been deploying teams of
nurses, mental health
and substance counselors
and formerly homeless
peer advocates throughout
Skid Row.
Their goal is to improve health
outcomes for this medically
complex and costly homeless
population by
giving them a home.
This Housing for Health program
uses Medicaid dollars to fund
supportive services, like
mental health counseling and
substance abuse treatment in
locations where new housing is
being offered.
On the day we tagged along, the
team reconnected with a client
who had been wanting to get
off the streets.
WOMAN: Are you familiar
with the (INAUDIBLE)
MAN: No?
WOMAN: No?
OK.
So, that's like -- that's the
one everyone likes, because
you can get your own room.
MAN: That sounds
like my kind of room.
WOMAN: Yes, exactly.
Yes.
WOMAN: It was a blessing
to find him here.
We will basically link him to
services and help him get to
the point where he wants to
be.
CAT WISE: Nearly 3,000 people
have received housing so far,
and the goal is to get 7,000
more off the streets by 2020.
DR.
MITCH KATZ, Director,
Los Angeles County Health
Agency: We have had
dramatic drops in emergency
department visits
and hospitalizations
following housing people.
CAT WISE: Dr. Mitch Katz is
the director of the Los Angeles
Health Agency, and he has
been leading the
county's effort.
We met at the Star Apartments,
a 100-unit building in the heart
of Skid Row with a community
garden, various counseling
services and a health
clinic on the main floor.
The monthly rent is covered
by county general funds,
donations, and residents.
But the services provided
are covered by Medicaid.
Dr. Katz took me on a tour
of a recently vacated unit.
DR.
MITCH KATZ: You will see that,
although the space is small,
it has everything that you
would need.
You have a refrigerator,
stove, sink.
It's not grand, but it really
changes somebody's life.
Over a hundred people
came directly out of the
hospital bed, or directly
from the emergency
room, and are now living here.
And I can take care of them for
way less than it costs to be
in the hospital, and they will
have a much higher-quality life.
CAT WISE: The ACA's Medicaid
changes have also been felt
by a much wider swathe of the
population, low-income,
often working adults who
previously had no access
to health insurance.
And that was the
story for 60-year-old
Jorge Arias, a former
self-employed truck driver.
Arias, who has had Medicaid
for the last two years, is a
patient at the Saban Community
Clinic, a non-profit federally
qualified health center which
opened its doors to low-income
clients 50 years ago.
Last year, Arias had emergency
surgery after a heart specialist
determined he had three
blocked arteries.
Without insurance, he says:
JORGE ARIAS, Medicaid Recipient:
I would not even be alive, you
know, because, no medications,
no doctors.
JULIE HUDMAN, CEO, Saban
Community Clinic: Well, we see
about 18,000 to 20,000 patients
a year; 10,000 of them have
Medicaid, and over 8,000 of
them got it with the expansion
under the ACA.
CAT WISE: Julie Hudman
is the CEO of the clinic.
JULIE HUDMAN: Before we had
the ACA, someone would come in
and, depending on their income,
we'd take a co-pay,
and it typically was
around $18 per person.
Now, when a patient comes
in with Medicaid, we receive
about $200 for the visit.
The difference between the
$18 and the $200, $225 is, you
know, a huge source of revenue
for us, and allows us
to stabilize, to keep
our doors open, and then
actually expand services.
MAN: So, how have
you been this week?
WOMAN: Fine.
Yes, I'm good.
CAT WISE: Some of those new
services include mental health
counseling, which could be cut
back if the clinic
loses funding.
Traditional Medicaid programs,
like those for the disabled
and long-term care for the
elderly, could also be impacted.
Victoria and Steve Rosen
are the proud, adopted
parents of 16-year-old
Max, who has a number
of health problems due
to prenatal exposure
to drugs and alcohol.
VICTORIA ROSEN,
California: So this is Max.
When we first met him
in the NICU, he had a
very rough beginning.
CAT WISE: Max is the
recipient of a Medicaid-funded
program called In-Home
Supportive Services.
Victoria earns about
$3,500 a month through
the program to help Max
with things like personal
care and feeding.
That financial support has
been key for the family because
helping Max is a full-time
job, and Victoria hasn't been
able to work outside the home.
VICTORIA ROSEN: It helps
us survive, basically.
I mean, before this, we
were, you know, in debt.
We don't spend a
lot of extra money.
And all the money
we spend is on Max.
CAT WISE: But many supportive
Medicaid service programs like
this one are considered optional
under traditional Medicaid,
and if states have to take on
more financial responsibility
for Medicaid with the new
Republican plan, health analysts
and program leaders say the
optional services
are likely to be cut.
To the Rosens, that doesn't
make a lot of sense.
STEVE ROSEN, California:
IHSS saves money.
It would be more expensive to
take care of someone like Max
in an institutional setting
than it is to have
him in his own house.
CAT WISE: Many Republicans say
these programs may be important,
but Medicaid is simply out
of control.
MICHAEL CANNON, Cato Institute:
Medicaid has grown into this
incredibly wasteful program,
rife with fraud, siphoning lots
of money away from the people
the program should be helping.
CAT WISE: Michael Cannon is
the director of health policy
studies at the Cato Institute,
a libertarian think tank.
Cannon is concerned the current
legislation being considered
by Congress wouldn't go far
enough in axing federal
Medicaid regulations and turning
over control to the states.
MICHAEL CANNON: So, what
Congress should be doing here
is saying to the states, look,
we don't know how to run these
programs better than you.
We will continue our
contribution to your
Medicaid programs, but
we're going to give
you a fixed amount of money.
It's not going to grow from
one year to the next, but we're
also going to give you full
flexibility to run your
programs the way you think
is best for your state.
States will have a much greater
incentives then to eliminate
fraud, to make sure that
those Medicaid dollars are
being spent on the people the
program was meant to help,
and not on the people the
program wasn't meant to help.
CAT WISE: Back in Los Angeles,
the health department's Dr.
Katz says he has no problem
working within a budget as
long as it is a fair one.
DR.
MITCH KATZ: If you
give me flexibility,
I can do a better job.
And I could do a better
job for less money.
But I can't do 70
cents on the dollar.
Then, I'm actually going
to have to cut services.
CAT WISE: While the health care
debates continue in Washington,
the teams on Skid Row are still
hitting the streets looking
for people to help, and hoping
they can do so for a very
long time.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Cat
Wise in Los Angeles, California.